---
title: "Sustainability Proposal: Excess Transaction Fee Rebate on Algorand"
date: 2025-05-15T11:07:37+03:00
---

Algorand fee sustainability has recently come back into the community spotlight.

In this debate, there is considerable traction behind the notion that increasing the minimum transaction fee will negatively impact adoption: high volume applications may reduce their on-chain volume, or stop altogether, and certain use cases (like micropayments or microinteractions) may no longer be viable on Algorand.

I would avoid raising the minimum transaction fee for now, as I think it would be simultaneously too much (see above) and too little (would not make enough of a positive impact on sustainability vs its anticipated costs.)

Instead I would experiment with innovative ways to bridge the sustainability gap, and this proposal could be part of the strategy. It was originally proposed by [grzracz](https://x.com/grzracz), founder of Vestige.

## Proposal

The idea is to encourage application developers to require "excess" transaction fees - that is, more fees than required by the protocol:

1) Application developers can suggest (or enforce) "excess" fees in their application calls
2) Excess fees generated by applications are partly rebated to the application developer

## Benefits

- Incentivize high transaction volume applications
- Can be initially implemented without consensus protocol change
- Foundation funds the fee sink at a discount

## Implementation questions

How is the application developer revenue address determined? Need to consider cases where applications are created by other applications (registry/deployer pattern)

Is this an opt-in system, or in effect by default?

## Decisions to be made

- Fund current applications, or only future ones? (created after a cut-off txn ID)
- Secondary benefits beyond rebate?
  - Application developers may as well require a payment fee and keep 100% of it

